readme : refresh (#26280)
ggml-org/llama.cpp: docs/models.md

# Obtaining and quantizing models

> The [Hugging Face](https://huggingface.co) platform hosts a [number of LLMs](https://huggingface.co/models?library=gguf&sort=trending) compatible with `llama.cpp`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [Hugging Face](https://huggingface.co) platform hosts [thousands of LLMs](https://huggingface.co/models?library=gguf&sort=trending) compatible with `llama.cpp`:
```

- [Trending](https://huggingface.co/models?library=gguf&sort=trending)

> - [LLaMA](https://huggingface.co/models?sort=trending&search=llama+gguf)

Reviewer: Why is the Llama search relevant?
(And the latest spelling is `Llama`)

> You can either manually download the GGUF file or directly use any `llama.cpp`-compatible models from [Hugging Face](https://huggingface.co/) or other model hosting sites, by using this CLI argument: `-hf <user>/<model>[:quant]`. For example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can use any `llama.cpp`-compatible model from [Hugging Face](https://huggingface.co/) using this CLI argument: `-hf <user>/<model>[:quant]`. For example:
```

I think it follows well from the HF links displayed before, and we can mention direct downloads later.

```sh

> llama-cli -hf ggml-org/gemma-3-1b-it-GGUF

Reviewer: ```suggestion
llama cli -hf ggml-org/gemma-3-1b-it-GGUF
```

```

> By default, the CLI would download from Hugging Face, you can switch to other options with the environment variable `MODEL_ENDPOINT`. The `MODEL_ENDPOINT` must point to a Hugging Face compatible API endpoint.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can use the same CLI invocation to download from other sites, by pointing the `MODEL_ENDPOINT` environment variable to an endpoint compatible with the Hugging Face API.

`llama.cpp` can also run models you have downloaded locally to your filesystem.
```

After downloading a model, use the CLI tools to run it locally - see below.

> `llama.cpp` requires the model to be stored in the [GGUF](https://github.com/ggml-org/ggml/blob/master/docs/gguf.md) file format. Models in other data formats can be converted to GGUF using the `convert_*.py` Python scripts in this repo.

Reviewer: maybe link to https://github.com/ggml-org/llama.cpp/blob/master/tools/quantize/README.md here, since we mention the conversion scripts?
